<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pastoral VII: Meliboeus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="pastoral-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:drama z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Pastoral</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Meliboeus</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Meliboeus. Corydon. Thyrsis</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Meliboeus here gives us the relation of a sharp poetical contest between Thyrsis and Corydon, at which he himself and Daphnis were present; who both declared for Corydon.</p>
			</header>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Meliboeus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Beneath a holm, repaired two jolly swains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(Their sheep and goats together grazed the plains),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both young Arcadians, both alike inspired</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sing, and answer as the song required.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daphnis, as umpire, took the middle seat;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fortune thither led my weary feet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, while I fenced my myrtles from the cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The father of my flock had wandered from the fold.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Daphnis I enquired: he smiling said,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Dismiss your fear,” and pointed where he fed:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“And, if no greater cares disturb your mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sit here with us, in covert of the wind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your lowing heifers, of their own accord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At watering time will seek the neighbouring ford.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here wanton Mincius winds along the meads,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shades his happy banks with bending reeds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And see, from yon old oak that mates the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How black the clouds of swarming bees arise.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What should I do? nor was Alcippe nigh,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor absent Phillis could my care supply,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To house, and feed by hand, my weaning lambs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And drain the strutting udders of their dams.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great was the strife betwixt the singing swains:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I preferred my pleasure to my gains.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alternate rhyme the ready champions chose:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These Corydon rehearsed and Thyrsis those.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corydon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye muses, ever fair, and ever young,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assist my numbers, and inspire my song.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all my Codrus, O! inspire my breast:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Codrus, after Phoebus, sings the best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, if my wishes have presumed too high,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stretched their bounds beyond mortality,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The praise of artful numbers I resign,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hang my pipe upon the sacred pine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thyrsis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Arcadian swains, your youthful poet crown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With ivy-wreaths; tho surly Codrus frown.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, if he blast my muse with envious praise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then fence my brows with amulets of bays,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lest his ill arts or his malicious tongue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should poison or bewitch my growing song.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corydon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>These branches of a stag, this tusky boar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(The first essay of arms untried before),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Young Micon offers, Delia, to thy shrine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But speed his hunting with thy power divine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy statue then of Parian stone shall stand;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy legs in buskins with a purple band.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thyrsis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This bowl of milk, these cakes (our country fare),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thee, Priapus, yearly we prepare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because a little garden is thy care.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if the falling lambs increase my fold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy marble statue shall be turned to gold.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corydon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fair Galatea, with thy silver feet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O, whiter than the swan, and more than Hybla sweet!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tall as a poplar, taper as the bole!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, charm thy shepherd, and restore my soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, when my lated sheep at night return;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And crown the silent hours, and stop the rosy morn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thyrsis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May I become as abject in thy sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As sea-weed on the shore, and black as night;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rough as a burr, deformed like him who chaws</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sardinian herbage to contract his jaws;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such and so monstrous let thy swain appear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If one day’s absence looks not like a year.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hence from the field, for shame! the flock deserves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No better feeding, while the shepherd starves.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corydon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye mossy springs, inviting easy sleep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye trees whose leafy shades those mossy fountains keep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Defend my flock! The summer heats are near,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And blossoms on the swelling vines appear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thyrsis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With heapy fires our cheerful hearth is crowned;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And firs for torches in the woods abound:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We fear not more the winds, and wintry cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than streams the banks, or wolves the bleating fold.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corydon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Our woods with juniper and chesnuts crowned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With falling fruits and berries paint the ground;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lavish nature laughs, and strews her stores around.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, if Alexis from our mountains fly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en running rivers leave their channels dry.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thyrsis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Parched are the plains, and frying is the field,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor withering vines their juicy vintage yield.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, if returning Phyllis bless the plain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The grass revives; the woods are green again;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Jove descends in showers of kindly rain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Corydon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The poplar is by great Alcides worn;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The brows of Phoebus his own bays adorn;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The branching vine the jolly Bacchus loves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Cyprian queen delights in myrtle groves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With hazel Phyllis crowns her flowing hair;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, while she loves that common wreath to wear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor bays, nor myrtle boughs, with hazel shall compare.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thyrsis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The towering ash is fairest in the woods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In gardens pines, and poplars by the floods;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, if my Lycidas will ease my pains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And often visit our forsaken plains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To him the towering ash shall yield in woods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In gardens pines, and poplars by the floods.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Meliboeus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The rhymes I did to memory commend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When vanquished Thyrsis did in vain contend;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since when, ’tis Corydon among the swains;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Young Corydon without a rival reigns.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
