<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pastoral III: Palaemon</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="pastoral-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:drama z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Pastoral</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Palaemon</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Menalcas. Damoetas. Palaemon</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Damoetas and Menalcas, after some smart strokes of country raillery, resolve to try who has the most skill at a song; and accordingly make their neighbour Palaemon judge of their performances; who, after a full hearing of both parties, declares himself unfit for the decision of so weighty a controversy, and leaves the victory undetermined.</p>
			</header>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ho, swain! what shepherd owns those ragged sheep?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aegon’s they are: he gave them me to keep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Unhappy sheep of an unhappy swain!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While he Neaera courts, but courts in vain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fears that I the damsel shall obtain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou, varlet, dost thy master’s gains devour;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou milk’st his ewes, and often twice an hour;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of grass and fodder thou defraud’st the dams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of their mother’s dugs the starving lambs.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good words, young catamite, at least to men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We know who did your business, how, and when;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in what chapel too you played your prize,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what the goats observed with leering eyes:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nymphs were kind, and laughed; and there your safety lies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, when I cropt the hedges of the leas,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cut Micon’s tender vines, and stole the stays!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Or rather, when beneath yon ancient oak,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bow of Daphnis, and the shafts, you broke,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When the fair boy received the gift of right;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, but for mischief, you had died for spite.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What nonsense would the fool thy master prate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When thou, his knave, canst talk at such a rate!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did I not see you, rascal, did I not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When you lay snug to snap young Damon’s goat?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His mongrel barked: I ran to his relief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cried, “There, there he goes! stop, stop the thief!”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Discovered, and defeated of your prey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You skulk’d behind the fence, and sneaked away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>An honest man may freely take his own:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The goat was mine, by singing fairly won.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A solemn match was made: he lost the prize.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ask Damon, ask, if he the debt denies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I think he dares not: if he does, he lies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou sing with him? thou booby! Never pipe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was so profaned to touch that blubbered lip.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dunce at the best! in streets but scarce allowed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tickle, on thy straw, the stupid crowd.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To bring it to the trial, will you dare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our pipes, our skill, our voices to compare?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My brinded heifer to the stake I lay:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two thriving calves she suckles twice a day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And twice besides her beestings never fail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To store the dairy with a brimming pail.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now back your singing with an equal stake.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That should be seen, if I had one to make.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You know too well, I feed my father’s flock:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What can I wager from the common stock?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A stepdame too I have, a cursed she,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who rules my henpecked sire, and orders me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both number twice a day the milky dams;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And once she takes the tale of all the lambs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, since you will be mad, and since you may</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suspect my courage, if I should not lay;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pawn I proffer shall be full as good:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two bowls I have, well turned, of beechen wood;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both by divine Alcimedon were made:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To neither of them yet the lip is laid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lids are ivy: grapes in clusters lurk</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath the carving of the curious work.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two figures on the sides embossed appear⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Conon, and what’s his name who made the spear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And showed the seasons of the sliding year,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Instructed in his trade the labouring swain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when to reap, and when to sow the grain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I have two, to match your pair, at home;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wood the same; from the same hand they come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(The kimbo handles seem with bear’s-foot carved),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And never yet to table have been served;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where Orpheus on his lyre laments his love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With beasts encompassed, and a dancing grove.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But these, nor all the proffers you can make,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are worth the heifer which I set to stake.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No more delays, vain boaster, but begin!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I prophesy beforehand I shall win.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Palaemon shall be judge how ill you rhyme:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll teach you how to brag another time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Rhymer, come on! and do the worst you can.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fear not you, nor yet a better man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With silence, neighbour, and attention, wait:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ’tis a business of a high debate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palaemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sing, then: the shade affords a proper place;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The trees are clothed with leaves, the fields with grass;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blossoms blow; the birds on bushes sing;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Nature has accomplished all the spring.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The challenge to Damoetas shall belong;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Menalcas shall sustain his under-song:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each in his turn, your tuneful numbers bring:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By turns the tuneful Muses love to sing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From the great father of the gods above</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My muse begins: for all is full of Jove;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Jove the care of heaven and earth belongs;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My flocks he blesses, and he loves my songs.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Me Phoebus loves; for he my muse inspires;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, in her songs, the warmth he gave, requires.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For him, the god of shepherds and their sheep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My blushing hyacinths and my bays I keep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My Phyllis me with pelted apples plies:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then tripping to the woods the wanton hies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wishes to be seen before she flies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But fair Amyntas comes unasked to me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And offers love, and sits upon my knee:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not Delia to my dogs is known so well as he.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To the dear mistress of my love-sick mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her swain a pretty present has designed:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I saw two stock-doves billing, and ere long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will take the nest; and hers shall be the young.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ten ruddy wildings in the wood I found,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stood on tip-toes, reaching from the ground:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sent Amyntas all my present store;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And will, to-morrow, send as many more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The lovely maid lay panting in my arms;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all she said and did was full of charms.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Winds! on your wings to heaven her accents bear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such words as heaven alone is fit to hear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! what avails it me, my love’s delight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To call you mine, when absent from my sight!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hold the nets, while you pursue the prey;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And must not share the dangers of the day.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I keep my birthday: send my Phyllis home:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At sheering-time, Iolas, you may come.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With Phyllis I am more in grace than you:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her sorrow did my parting steps pursue:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Adieu my dear! (she said) a long adieu!”</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The nightly wolf is baneful to the fold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Storms to the wheat, to buds the bitter cold;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, from my frowning fair, more ills I find,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than from the wolves, and storms, and winter wind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The kids with pleasure browse the bushy plain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The showers are grateful to the swelling grain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To teeming ewes the sallow’s tender tree;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, more than all the world, my love to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pollio my rural verse vouchsafes to read:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A heifer, Muses, for your patron breed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My Pollio writes himself: a bull be bred,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With spurning heels, and with a butting head.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who Pollio loves, and who his muse admires,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let Pollio’s fortune crown his full desires,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let myrrh instead of thorn his fences fill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And showers of honey from his oaks distill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who hates not living Bavius, let him be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(Dead Maevius!) damned to love thy works and thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The same ill taste of sense would serve to join</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dog-foxes in the yoke, and shear the swine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye boys, who pluck the flowers, and spoil the spring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beware the secret snake that shoots a sting.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Graze not too near the banks, my jolly sheep:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ground is false; the running streams are deep:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See, they have caught the father of the flock,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who dries his fleece upon the neighbouring rock.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From rivers drive the kids, and sling your hook:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Anon I’ll wash them in the shallow brook.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To fold, my flock!⁠—when milk is dried with heat,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In vain the milk-maid tugs an empty teat.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How lank my bulls from plenteous pasture come!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But love, that drains the herd, destroys the groom.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My flocks are free from love, yet look so thin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their bones are barely covered with their skin.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What magic has bewitched the woolly dams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what ill eyes beheld the tender lambs?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damoetas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, where the round of heaven, which all contains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To three short ells on earth our sight restrains:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell that, and rise a Phoebus for thy pains.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, tell me first, in what new region springs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A flower, that bears inscribed the names of kings;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou shalt gain a present as divine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As Phoebus’ self; for Phyllis shall be thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palaemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So nice a difference in your singing lies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That both have won, or both deserved, the prize.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rest equal happy both; and all who prove</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bitter sweets, and pleasing pains, of love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now dam the ditches, and the floods restrain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their moisture has already drenched the plain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
