<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pastoral X: Gallus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="pastoral-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Pastoral</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Gallus</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Gallus, a great patron of Virgil, and an excellent poet, was very deeply in love with one Citheris, whom he calls Lycoris, and who had forsaken him for the company of a soldier. The poet therefore supposes his friend Gallus retired, in his height of melancholy, into the solitudes of Arcadia (the celebrated scene of pastorals), where he represents him in a very languishing condition, with all the rural deities about him, pitying his hard usage, and condoling his misfortune.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thy sacred succour, Arethusa, bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crown my labour (’tis the last I sing),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which proud Lycoris may with pity view:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The muse is mournful, though the numbers few.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuse me not a verse, to grief and Gallus due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So may thy silver streams beneath the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmixed with briny seas, securely glide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing then my Gallus, and his hopeless vows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing while my cattle crop the tender browse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vocal grove shall answer to the sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And echo, from the vales, the tuneful voice rebound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What lawns or woods withheld you from his aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye nymphs, when Gallus was to love betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love, unpitied by the cruel maid?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not steepy Pindus could retard your course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor cleft Parnassus, nor the Aonian source:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing that owns the muses, could suspend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your aid to Gallus:⁠—Gallus is their friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him the lofty laurel stands in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung with humid pearls the lowly shrub appears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maenalian pines the godlike swain bemoan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When spread beneath a rock, he sighed alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cold Lycaeus wept from every dropping stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheep surround their shepherd, as he lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blush not, sweet poet, nor the name despise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the streams, his flock Adonis fed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the queen of beauty blest his bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swains and tardy neat-herds came, and last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Menalcas, wet with beating winter mast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wondering, they asked from whence arose thy flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet more amazed, thy own Apollo came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flushed were his cheeks, and glowing were his eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is she thy care? is she thy care? (he cries)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy false Lycoris flies thy love and thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for thy rival, tempts the raging sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forms of horrid war, and heaven’s inclemency.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silvanus came: his brows a country crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fennel, and of nodding lilies, drown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Pan arrived; and we beheld him too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cheeks and temples of vermilion hue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, Gallus, this immoderate grief? (he cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think’st thou that love with tears is satisfied?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meads are sooner drunk with morning dews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bees with flowery shrubs, the goats with browse.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmoved, and with dejected eyes, he mourned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He paused, and then these broken words returned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis past; and pity gives me no relief:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you, Arcadian swains, shall sing my grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on your hills my last complaints renew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sad a song is only worthy you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How light would lie the turf upon my breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you my sufferings in your songs exprest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! that your birth and business had been mine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pen the sheep, and press the swelling vine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Phyllis or Amyntas caused my pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any nymph or shepherd on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Though Phyllis brown, though black, Amyntas were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are violets not sweet, because not fair?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the sallows and the shady vine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My loves had mixed their pliant limbs with mine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phyllis with myrtle wreaths had crowned my hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soft Amyntas sung away my care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, see what pleasures in our plains abound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woods, the fountains and the flowery ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you are beauteous, were you half so true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here could I live, and love, and die, with only you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I to fighting fields am sent afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strive in winter camps with toils of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While you (alas, that I should find it so!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shun my sight, your native soil forgo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climb the frozen Alps, and tread the eternal snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye frosts and snows, her tender body spare!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those are not limbs for icicles to tear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me, the wilds and deserts are my choice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The muses, once my care; my once harmonious voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will I sing, forsaken and alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rocks and hollow caves shall echo to my moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rind of every plant her name shall know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the rind extends, the love shall grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on Arcadian mountains will I chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Mixed with the woodland nymphs) the savage race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor cold shall hinder me, with horns and hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thrid the thickets, or to leap the mounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now methinks o’er steepy rocks I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rush through sounding woods, and bend the Parthian bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if with sports my sufferings I could ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or by my pains the god of love appease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My frenzy changes: I delight no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On mountaintops to chase the tusky boar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No game but hopeless love my thoughts pursue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more, ye nymphs, and songs, and sounding woods, adieu!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love alters not for us his hard decrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though beneath the Thracian clime we freeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Italy’s indulgent heaven forgo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in mid-winter tread Sithonian snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, when the barks of elms are scorched, we keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Meroë’s burning plains the Libyan sheep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hell, and earth, and seas, and heaven above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love conquers all; and we must yield to Love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My muses, here your sacred raptures end:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The verse was what I owed my suffering friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This while I sung, my sorrows I deceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bending osiers into baskets weaved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The song, because inspired by you, shall shine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gallus will approve, because ’tis mine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallus, for whom my holy flames renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each hour, and every moment rise in view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As alders, in the spring, their boles extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heave so fiercely, that the bark they rend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us rise; for hoarseness oft invades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The singer’s voice, who sings beneath the shades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From juniper unwholesome dews distill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blast the sooty corn, the withering herbage kill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, my goats, away! for you have browsed your fill.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
