<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pastoral IV: Pollio</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="pastoral-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Pastoral</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Pollio</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The poet celebrates the birthday of Saloninus, the son of Pollio, born in the consulship of his father, after the taking of Salonae, a city in Dalmatia. Many of the verses are translated from one of the Sibyls, who prophesied of our Saviour’s birth.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Sicilian muse, begin a loftier strain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though lowly shrubs, and trees that shade the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight not all; Sicilian muse, prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the vocal woods deserve a consul’s care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last great age, foretold by sacred rhymes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renews its finished course: Saturnian times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll round again; and mighty years, begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their first orb, in radiant circles run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The base degenerate iron offspring ends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden progeny from heaven descends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O chaste Lucina! speed the mother’s pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haste the glorious birth! thy own Apollo reigns!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lovely boy, with his auspicious face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall Pollio’s consulship and triumph grace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Majestic months set out with him to their appointed race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father banished virtue shall restore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crimes shall threat the guilty world no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son shall lead the life of gods, and be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By gods and heroes seen, and gods and heroes see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The jarring nations he in peace shall bind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with paternal virtues rule mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unbidden earth shall wreathing ivy bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fragrant herbs (the promises of spring),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As her first offerings to her infant king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goats with strutting dugs shall homeward speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lowing herds secure from lions, feed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cradle shall with rising flowers be crowned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serpent’s brood shall die; the sacred ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall weeds and poisonous plants refuse to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each common bush shall Syrian roses wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when heroic verse his youth shall raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And form it to hereditary praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlaboured harvests shall the fields adorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clustered grapes shall blush on every thorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knotted oaks shall showers of honey weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the matted grass the liquid cold shall creep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, of old fraud some footsteps shall remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The merchant still shall plough the deep for gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great cities shall with walls be compassed round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sharpened shares shall vex the fruitful ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another Tiphys shall new seas explore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another Argo land the chiefs upon the Iberian shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another Helen other wars create,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great Achilles urge the Trojan fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when to ripened manhood he shall grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greedy sailor shall the seas forego:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No keel shall cut the waves for foreign ware;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every soil shall every product bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labouring hind his oxen shall disjoin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No plough shall hurt the glebe, no pruning hook the vine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wool shall in dissembled colours shine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the luxurious father of the fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With native purple or unborrowed gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath his pompous fleece shall proudly sweat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under Tyrian robes the lamb shall bleat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Fates, when they this happy web have spun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall bless the sacred clue, and bid it smoothly run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mature in years, to ready honours move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O of celestial seed! O foster-son of Jove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, labouring Nature calls thee to sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nodding frame of heaven, and earth, and main!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See to their base restored, earth, seas, and air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joyful ages, from behind, in crowding ranks appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sing thy praise, would heaven my breath prolong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infusing spirits worthy such a song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Thracian Orpheus should transcend my lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Linus crowned with never-fading bays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though each his heavenly parent should inspire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The muse instruct the voice, and Phoebus tune the lyre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should Pan contend in verse, and thou my theme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcadian judges should their god condemn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin, auspicious boy! to cast about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy infant eyes, and, with a smile, thy mother single out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother well deserves that short delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nauseous qualms of ten long months and travail to requite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then smile! the frowning infant’s doom is read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No god shall crown the board, nor goddess bless the bed.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
