<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pastoral V: Daphnis</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="pastoral-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:drama z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Pastoral</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Daphnis</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Menalcas. Mopsus</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Mopsus and Menalcas, two very expert shepherds at a song, begin one, by consent, to the memory of Daphnis, who is supposed by the best critics to represent Julius Caesar. Mopsus laments his death; Menalcas proclaims his divinity; the whole eclogue consisting of an elegy and an apotheosis.</p>
			</header>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Since on the downs our flocks together feed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And since my voice can match your tuneful reed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why sit we not beneath the grateful shade,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which hazels, intermixed with elms, have made?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whether you please that sylvan scene to take,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where whistling winds uncertain shadows make;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or will you to the cooler cave succeed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose mouth the curling vines have overspread?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Your merit and your years command the choice:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Amyntas only rivals you in voice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What will not that presuming shepherd dare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who thinks his voice with Phoebus may compare?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Begin you first; if either Alcon’s praise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or dying Phyllis, have inspired your lays:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If her you mourn, or Codrus you commend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Begin; and Tityrus your flock shall tend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Or shall I rather the sad verse repeat,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which on the beech’s bark I lately writ?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I writ, and sung betwixt. Now bring the swain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose voice you boast, and let him try the strain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Such as the shrub to the tall olive shows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or the pale sallow to the blushing rose:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such is his voice, if I can judge aright,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Compared to thine, in sweetness and in height.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No more, but sit and hear the promised lay:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gloomy grotto makes a doubtful day.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nymphs about the breathless body wait</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Daphnis, and lament his cruel fate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The trees and floods were witness to their tears:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At length the rumour reached his mother’s ears.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wretched parent, with a pious haste,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came running, and his lifeless limbs embraced.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She sighed, she sobbed; and, furious with despair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She rent her garments, and she tore her hair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accusing all the gods, and every star.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The swains forgot their sheep, nor near the brink</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of running waters brought their herds to drink.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The thirsty cattle, of themselves, abstained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From water, and their grassy fare disdained.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The death of Daphnis, woods and hills deplore;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They cast the sound to Libya’s desert shore;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Libyan lions hear, and hearing roar.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fierce tigers Daphnis taught the yoke to bear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And first with curling ivy dressed the spear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daphnis did rites to Bacchus first ordain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And holy revels for his reeling train.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As vines the trees, as grapes the vines adorn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As bulls the herds, and fields the yellow corn:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So bright a splendour, so divine a grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The glorious Daphnis cast on his illustrious race.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When envious Fate the godlike Daphnis took,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our guardian gods the fields and plains forsook;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pales no longer swelled the teeming grain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor Phoebus fed his oxen on the plain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No fruitful crop the sickly fields return;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But oats and darnel choke the rising corn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And where the vales with violets once were crowned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now knotty burrs and thorns disgrace the ground.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, shepherds, come, and strew with leaves the plain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such funeral rites your Daphnis did ordain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With cypress boughs the crystal fountains hide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And softly let the running waters glide.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A lasting monument to Daphnis raise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With this inscription to record his praise:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Daphnis, the fields’ delight, the shepherds’ love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Renowned on earth, and deified above;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose flock excelled the fairest on the plains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But less than he himself surpassed the swains.”</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O heavenly poet! such thy verse appears,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So sweet, so charming to my ravished ears,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As to the weary swain, with cares opprest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath the sylvan shade, refreshing rest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As to the feverish traveller, when first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He finds a crystal stream to quench his thirst.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In singing, as in piping, you excel;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And scarce your master could perform so well.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O fortunate young man! at least your lays</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are next to his, and claim the second praise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such as they are, my rural songs I join,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To raise our Daphnis to the powers divine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Daphnis was so good, to love whate’er was mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How is my soul with such a promise raised;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For both the boy was worthy to be praised,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Stimicon has often made me long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hear, like him, so soft, so sweet a song.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Daphnis, the guest of heaven, with wondering eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Views, in the milky way, the starry skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And far beneath him, from the shining sphere,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beholds the moving clouds, and rolling year.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For this, with cheerful cries the woods resound;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The purple spring arrays the various ground;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nymphs and shepherds dance; and Pan himself is crowned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wolf no longer prowls for nightly spoils,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor birds the springes fear, nor stags the toils;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Daphnis reigns above, and deals from thence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His mother’s milder beams, and peaceful influence.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mountain-tops unshorn, the rocks, rejoice;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lowly shrubs partake of human voice.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assenting nature, with a gracious nod,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Proclaims him, and salutes the new-admitted god.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be still propitious, ever good to thine!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold! four hallowed altars we design;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And two to thee, and two to Phoebus rise;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On both is offered annual sacrifice.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The holy priests, at each returning year,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two bowls of milk, and two of oil shall bear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I myself the guest with friendly bowls will cheer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two goblets will I crown with sparkling wine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The generous vintage of the Chian vine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These will I pour to thee, and make the nectar thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In winter shall the genial feast be made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before the fire; by summer, in the shade.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Damoetas shall perform the rites divine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Lyctian Aegon in the song shall join.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alphesiboeus tripping shall advance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mimic satyrs in his antic dance.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When to the nymphs our annual rites we pay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when our fields with victims we survey:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While savage boars delight in shady woods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And finny fish inhabit in the floods:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While bees on thyme, and locusts feed on dew:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy grateful swains these honours shall renew.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such honours as we pay to powers divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Bacchus and to Ceres, shall be thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such annual honours shall be given; and thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shalt hear, and shalt condemn thy suppliants to their vow.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What present, worth thy verse, can Mopsus find?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not the soft whispers of the southern wind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That play through trembling trees, delight me more;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor murmuring billows on the sounding shore;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor winding streams that through the valley glide,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the scarce-covered pebbles gently chide.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menalcas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Receive you first this tuneful pipe, the same</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That played my Corydon’s unhappy flame;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The same that sung Neaera’s conquering eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, had the judge been just, had won the prize.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mopsus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Accept from me this sheep-hook in exchange;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The handle brass; the knobs in equal range.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Antigenes, with kisses, often tried</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To beg this present in his beauty’s pride,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When youth and love are hard to be denied.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But what I could refuse to his request,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is yours unasked; for you deserve it best.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
